---
title: Real Analysis
subtitle: Continuous Functions
---

# Continuity

Let $X$ and $Y$ be metric spaces, $E \subset X$, $p \in E$, $f : E \rightarrow Y$. Say function $f$ is _continuous at $p$_ if for any $\epsilon > 0$, there exists $\delta > 0$ such that for any $x \in E$, $d(x, p) < \delta$ implies $d(f(x), f(p)) < \epsilon$.

__Theorem.__ If $p$ is a limit point of $E$ then $f$ is continuous at $p$ if and only if $\lim\limits_{x \rightarrow p} f(x) = f(p)$. Also, if $x_n$ is a convergent sequence then $f$ is continuous if and only if $\lim\limits_{n \rightarrow \infty} f(x_n) = f\left(\lim\limits_{n \rightarrow \infty} x_n\right)$.

__Corollary.__ Given $Y \subset \mathbb{R}$, sums and products of continuous functions are continuous; quotients $\frac{f}{q}$ are continuous when $g \neq 0$.

__Corollary.__ $f, g : X \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^k$ such that $f = (f_1, f_2, \dots, f_k)$.

(a) $f$ is continuous if and only if each $f_i$ is continuous.
(b) $f + g$ and $f \cdot g$ are continuous.

__Theorem.__ $f : X \rightarrow Y$ is continuous if and only if for any open set $U \subset Y$, $f^{-1}(U)$ is open in $X$.

_Proof._

($\Rightarrow$): Given $U$ which is open in $Y$, consider $x \in f^{-1}(U)$. We'll show $x$ is an interior point. Since $U$ is open and $f(x) \in U$, there exists an open ball $B_\epsilon(f(x)) \subset U$. By continuity of $f$, there exists an open ball $B_\delta(x)$ that maps into $B_\epsilon(f(x)) \subset U$. This means $B_\delta(x) \subset f^{-1}(U)$. So $x$ is an interior point of $f^{-1}(U)$.

($\Leftarrow$): Fix arbitrary $x \in X$ and $\epsilon > 0$. Consider $B_\epsilon(f(x))$. So, $x \in f^{-1}(B_\epsilon(f(x)))$, which is open by assumption. So $p$ is an interior point. Hence, there exists an open ball $B_\delta(x) \subset f^{-1}(B_\epsilon(f(x)))$. This $\delta$ has the required property. So $f$ is continuous. QED.

## Consequences

__Theorem.__ If $f : X \rightarrow Y$, $g : Y \rightarrow Z$, $f$ and $g$ are continuous then $g \circ f$ is continuous.

_Proof._ Given $U$ open in $Z$, $g^{-1}(U)$ is open in $Y$, by continuity of $g$. So $f^{-1}(g^{-1}(U))$ is open in $X$, by continuity of $f$. But $f^{-1}(g^{-1}(U)) = (g \circ f)^{-1}(U)$. QED.

__Theorem.__ $f : X \rightarrow Y$ is continuous if and only if for any closed set $K \subset Y$, $f^{-1}(K)$ is closed in $X$.

__Theorem.__ If $f : X \rightarrow Y$, $f$ is continuous, and $X$ is compact, then $f(X)$ is compact.

_Proof._ Consider any open cover $\{V_\alpha\}$ of $f(X)$. Let $U_\alpha = f^{-1}(V_\alpha)$. By compactness of $X$, there exists a finite subcover $\{U_1, \dots, U_n\}$. Then the corresponding $\{V_1, \dots V_n\}$ is a finite subcover for $f(X)$, as desired. QED.

__Corollary.__ If $f : X \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^k$ and $X$ is compact then $f(X)$ is closed and bounded.

__Corollary.__ If $f : X \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ and $X$ is compact then $f$ achieves its maximum and minimum.

__Theorem.__ If $f : X \rightarrow Y$, $f$ is a bijection and is continuous, and $X$ is compact then $f^{-1}$ is continuous.

_Proof._ Suppose $U$ is open in $X$. So, $U^c$ is closed. Since $U^c$ is closed in a compact set $X$, $U^c$ is compact. Then its image $f(U^c)$ compact. Since $f(U^c)$ is compact, it is also closed. Hence $f(U)$ is open. Thus, $f^{-1}$ is continuous. QED.

__Theorem.__ If $f : X \rightarrow Y$ is continuous, $E$ is a connected subset of $X$, then $f(E)$ is connected.

_Proof (by contradiction)._ Suppose $f(E)$ is not connected. Then $f(E) = A \cup B$, a separation (i.e. $A \neq \emptyset$, $B \neq \emptyset$, and $\overline{A} \cap B = A \cap \overline{B} = \emptyset$). Notice $K_A = f^{-1}(\overline{A})$ and $K_B = f^{-1}(\overline{B})$ are closed since $f$ is continuous. Also notice $E_1 = f^{-1}(A) \cap E$ and $E_2 = f^{-1}(B) \cap E$ are disjoint and non-empty. Since $E_1 \subset K_A$, $\overline{E_1} \subset K_A$. Similarly, $\overline{E_2} \subset K_B$. Since $K_A = f^{-1}(\overline{A})$, $E_2 \subset f^{-1}(B)$, and $\overline{A} \cap B = \emptyset$, $K_A \cap E_2 = \emptyset$. Similarly, $K_B \cap E_1 = \emptyset$. Hence, $E$ is separated, which is a contradiction. QED.

__Theorem (Intermediate Value).__ Given a continuous function $f : [a, b] \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$, where $f(a) < c < f(b)$, then there exists $x \in (a, b)$ such that $f(x) = c$.

_Proof (by contradiction)._ Notice $[a, b]$ is connected. So, $f([a, b])$ is connected. But if $c$ is not achieved, then $((c, +\infty) \cap f([a, b])) \cup ((-\infty, c) \cap f([a, b]))$ is a separation of $f([a, b])$, a contradiction. QED.

The converse of the intermediate value theorem is false. Consider the topologist's sine curve
\begin{align}
f(x) =
\begin{cases}
0 & \text{if } x = 0 \\
\sin\left(\frac{1}{x}\right) & \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}
\end{align}
The topologist's sine curve is not continuous at $0$ but it satisfies the intermediate value property.

# Uniform Continuity

A function $f : X \rightarrow Y$ is _uniform continuous_ on $X$ if for every $\epsilon > 0$, there exists $\delta > 0$ such that for every $x$ and $p$ in $X$, $d(x, p) < \delta$ implies $d(f(x), f(p)) < \epsilon$.

If $K$ is closed, define $d(x, K) := \inf\limits_{y \in K} d(x, y)$. $d(x, K)$ is a continuous function of $x$.

__Lebesgue Covering Lemma.__ If $\{U_\alpha\}$ is an open cover of a compact metric space $X$ then there exists $\delta > 0$ (called the _Lebesgue number of the cover_) such that for every $x \in X$, $B_\delta(x)$ is contained in some $U_\widehat{\alpha}$ of the cover.

_Proof._ Since $X$ is compact, there exists a finite subcover $\{U_{\alpha_i}\}_{i = 1}^n$. Define $f(x) = \frac{1}{n} \sum\limits_{i = 1}^n d(x, U_{\alpha_i})$. $f$ is a continuous function on a compact set, so it must attain its minimum value $\delta$. Hence, if $f(x) \geq \delta$ then at least one of $d(x, U_{\alpha_i}) \geq \delta$. So, for this $i$, $B_\delta(x) \subset U_{\alpha_i}$. Notice $\delta > 0$ because $f(x) > 0$ at each $x$ due to $U_{\alpha_i}$. QED.

__Theorem.__ Given $f : X \rightarrow Y$ and $X$ compact, $f$ is _uniformly continuous_ on $X$.
