---
title: Real Analysis
subtitle: Cardinality
---

## Functions

Recall a _function_ $f : A \rightarrow B$ maps $x \in A$ to $f(x) \in B$. $A$ is the _domain_ of $f$. $B$ is the _codomain_ of $f$.

If $C \subset A$ and $D \subset B$, define $f(C) = \{f(x) : x \in C\}$ as the _image_ of $C$, and $f^{-1}(D) = \{x : f(x) \in D\}$ as the _inverse image_ of $D$.

When $f(A) = B$, i.e. the _range_ of $A$ is the same as its _codomain_, $f$ is _onto_, or a _surjection_, denoted $f : A \twoheadrightarrow B$.

When $f(x) = f(y)$ implies $x = y$, $f$ is _one-to-one_, or an _injection_, denoted $f : A \hookrightarrow B$, or $f : A \rightarrowtail B$.

When $f$ is one-to-one and onto, $f$ is a _bijection_ ($f$ is denoted by an arrow with a hook on its tail and two heads pointing to the right), and $A$ and $B$ are in _one-to-one correspondence_, denoted $A \sim B$.

## Cardinality

Let $J_n := \{1, 2, \dots, n\}$, and $J_0 := \emptyset$.

A set $A$ is _finite_ if $A \sim J_n$. Otherwise, $A$ is _infinite_. $A$ is _countable_ if $A \sim \mathbb{N}$.

For example,

(@) $\mathbb{N}$ is countable: use $f : \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ where $f(x) = x$.
(@) A sequence $x_1, x_2, x_3, \dots$ of distinct terms is countable: use $f(n) = x_n$.

A set that can be listed in a sequence is countable.

For example,

(@) $\{2, 3, 4, \dots \}$ is countable: use $f(n) = n + 1$.
(@) $\{1, 2, 3, \dots, k - 1, k + 1, k + 2, \dots \}$ is countable: use
    \begin{align*}
    f(n) =
    \begin{cases}
    n & \text{if } n < k \\
    n + 1 & \text{otherwise.}
    \end{cases}
    \end{align*}

__Theorem.__ $\mathbb{N}$ is infinite.

_Proof sketch (by induction on $n$)._ Show that $\mathbb{N} \nsim J_n$.

Base case ($\mathbb{N} \xleftarrow{g} \{1\}$): Consider $\mathbb{N} \setminus J_1 \neq \emptyset$. So $g$ is not onto.

Inductive step: Show if $J_n \nsim \mathbb{N}$ then $J_{n+1} \nsim \mathbb{N}$. If there were a bijection $h$ such that $\mathbb{N} \xleftarrow{h} J_{n+1} = \{1, \dots, n, n+1\}$, then there would be a bijection $\widehat{h}$ such that $\mathbb{N} \setminus \{\widehat{h}(n+1)\} \xleftarrow{\widehat{h}} J_n = \{1, \dots, n\}$. By a previous example, there is a bijection $f$ such that $\mathbb{N} \xleftarrow{f} \mathbb{N} \setminus \{\widehat{h}(n+1)\}$. Thus, there exists a bijection $\mathbb{N} \leftarrow J_n = \{1, \dots, n\}$. QED.

For example,

(@) $\mathbb{N} \sim 2\mathbb{N} = \{2, 4, 6, 8, \dots\}$. $\mathbb{N}$ and $2\mathbb{N}$ have the _same cardinality_.
(@) $\mathbb{Z} = \{ \dots, -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3, \dots \}$ is countable: use
    \begin{align*}
    f(n) =
    \begin{cases}
    -2n & \text{if } n < 0 \\
    2n + 1 & \text{otherwise.}
    \end{cases}
    \end{align*}

__Theorem.__ Every infinite subset $E$ of a countable set $A$ is countable.

__Theorem.__ If $A$ is countable then $A \times A$ is countable.

__Theorem.__ $\mathbb{Q}$ is countable.

__Theorem.__ If $A$ is countable then $A^k$ is countable.

__Theorem.__ $\mathbb{R}$ is not countable.

The proof for $\mathbb{R}$ not being countable does not imply $\mathbb{Q}$ is not countable because the resulting constructed number may not be in $\mathbb{Q}$.

__Theorem.__ For any set $A$, $A \nsim 2^A$, where $2^A$ is the power set of $A$.

__Theorem.__ The countable union of countable sets is countable.

_Proof._ Let each $A_1, A_2, A_3, \dots$ be countable. Then,
\begin{align}
A_1 & = \{a_{11}, a_{12}, a_{13}, a_{14}, \dots\}, \\
A_2 & = \{a_{21}, a_{22}, a_{23}, a_{24}, \dots\}, \\
A_3 & = \{a_{31}, a_{32}, a_{33}, a_{34}, \dots\}, \\
A_4 & = \{a_{41}, a_{42}, a_{43}, a_{44}, \dots\}, \\
\vdots
\end{align}

Zigzagging through the above listings gives a listing, implying $\bigcup_{i=1}^{\infty} A_i$ is countable. QED.

Notation: Use $\bigcup_{\alpha \in J} A_\alpha$, where $J$ is an index set, for possibly uncountable collection.

For example,

(@) The set of computer programs is at most countable.

    Recall $\mathbb{R}$ is not countable (say $\mathbb{R}$ is uncountable).

    So there are real numbers that are not computable (it cannot be specified up to some arbitrary precision)!

__Cantor's Theorem (diagonalization argument).__ For any set $A$, we have $A \nsim 2^A$.

_Proof (by contradiction)._ Suppose there exists a bijection $f : A \rightarrow 2^A$. Then $a \mapsto f(a) \subset A$. Let $B = \{a : a \notin f(a)\}.$

If $B = f(x)$ for some $x \in A$, consider $x$. If $x \in B$ then $x \notin f(x) = B$, a contradiction. Hence, $x \notin B$, which implies $x \notin f(x)$, so $x \in B$, a contradiction.

Thus, $B \neq f(x)$ for any $x \in A$ (or $B$ is not an image of $x$ for any $x \in A$). QED.

For example,

(@) $2^A \sim \{\text{function } f : A \rightarrow \{0, 1\}\}$, by membership relation.
(@) $2^{\mathbb{R}} \sim$ all functions from $\mathbb{R}$ to $\{0, 1\}$.

    There are infinitely many cardinalities. Let $\omega$ be an ordinal number.
    $$
    0, 1, 2, \dots, \aleph_0, \aleph_1, \aleph_2, \dots, \aleph_\omega, \dots
    $$

    The continuum hypothesis ($\aleph_1 = c$, where $c$ is the cardinality of $\mathbb{R}$) is provably undecidable (independent of ZFC).
