---
title: Real Analysis
subtitle: Limit points
---

## Limit Points

Say $p \in X$ is a _limit point_ of $E \subset X$ if every neighborhood of $p$ (i.e. $N_r(p)$ for all $r$) contains a point $q \neq p$ such that $q \in E$.

So, a point $p$ is not a limit point of $E$ if there exists a neighborhood $N$ such that $N$ does not contain any other points of $E$.

For example,

(@) In $\mathbb{R}$, $G = \{\frac{1}{n} : n \in \mathbb{Z}\}$. $0$ is a limit point of $G$. In $\mathbb{R}$, a neighborhood of a point $p$ is an open interval $(p - \epsilon, p + \epsilon)$.

## Isolated Points

A point $p \in X$ is an _isolated point_ of $E \subset X$ if $p \in E$ and $p$ is not a limit point of $E$.

For exmple,

(@) All points of $G = \{\frac{1}{n} : n \in \mathbb{Z}\}$ are isolated.

## Interior Points

A point $p \in X$ is an _interior point_ of $E \subset X$ if $p \in E$ and there exists a neighborhood $N$ of $p$ such that $N \subset E$.

For example,

(@) $G = \{\frac{1}{n} : n \in \mathbb{Z}\}$ has no interior points.
(@) In $\mathbb{R}$, $\emptyset$ has no limit points, no interior points, and no isolated points, for $\mathbb{R}$ has no isolated points but all points in $\mathbb{R}$ are interior and are limit points, and $\mathbb{Q}$ has no isolated points but all points in $\mathbb{Q}$ are interior and are limit points.
(@) In ($\mathbb{R}$, $\text{discrete}$), $\emptyset$ has no limit points, no interior points, and no isolated points, $\mathbb{R}$ has no limit points but all points in $\mathbb{R}$ are interior and isolated, and $\mathbb{Q}$ has no limit points but all points in $\mathbb{Q}$ are interior and isolated.

__Theorem.__ If $p$ is a limit point of $E$, then every neighborhood of $p$ contains infinitely many points of $E$.

_Proof (by contradiction)._ Assume there exists a neighborhood $N$ of $p$ with only finitely many points in $E$, call them $e_1, e_2, \dots, e_n$.

Let $r = \min_{i = 1}^{n} \{d(p, e_i)\}$ ($r$ exists because $e_i$ is finite). But $N_r(p)$ has no points other than $p$, a contradiction! QED.

## Open Sets

A set $E$ is _open_ if every point of $E$ is an interior point of $E$.

For example,

(@) In $\mathbb{R}$, any open interval $(a, b)$ is open.
(@) In $\mathbb{R}$, $\emptyset$ is open.
(@) In $\mathbb{R}$, $\mathbb{R}$ is open.

## Closed Sets

A set $E$ is _closed_ if $E$ contains all its limit points.

For example,

(@) In $\mathbb{R}$, a single point $p$ is closed.
(@) In $\mathbb{R}$, $\emptyset$ is closed.
(@) In $\mathbb{R}$, $\mathbb{R}$ is closed.
(@) In $\mathbb{R}$, any closed interval $[a, b]$ is closed.
(@) In $\mathbb{R}$, any half-open interval $[a, b)$ or $(a, b]$ is neither open nor closed.

Sets which are both open and closed is called _clopen_.

## Closing a Non-Closed Set

The _closure_ of $E$, denoted $\overline{E}$, is the union of $E$ and the set of its limit points.
