---
title: Real Analysis
subtitle: Compact Sets
---

## Set Covers

An _open cover_, or cover, of a set $E$ in metric space $X$ is a collection of open sets, denoted $\{G_\alpha\}$, whose union covers, or contains, $E$.

A _subcover_ of $\{G_\alpha\}$ is a subcollection $\{G_{\alpha_\gamma}\}$ that still covers $E$.

For example,

(@) In $\mathbb{R}$, we have $\left[\frac{1}{2}, 1\right)$ has cover $\{V_n\}_{n = 3}^{\infty}$ where $V_n = \left(\frac{1}{n}, 1 - \frac{1}{n}\right)$. It also has cover $\{(0, 2)\}$. It also has cover $\{W_x\}_{x \in \left(\frac{1}{2}, 1\right)}$, where $W_x = N_\frac{1}{10}(x)$. $\{V_n\}_{n = 3}^{\infty}$ has subcovers $\{V_n\}_{n = 22}^{\infty}$ and $\{V_n\}_{n = 1000000}^{\infty}$. $\{(0, 2)\}$ has only one subcover $\{(0, 2)\}$. $\{W_x\}_{x \in \left(\frac{1}{2}, 1\right)}$ has a subcover $\left\{W_\frac{5}{10}, W_\frac{6}{10}, W_\frac{7}{10}, W_\frac{8}{10}, W_\frac{8}{10}, W_\frac{9}{10}\right\}$.
(@) $[0, 1] \in \mathbb{R}$ has a cover by $\{V_n\} \cup \{W_0, W_1\}$. A finite subcover is $\{W_0, W_1, V_{11}\}$.

## Compact Sets

A set $K$ is _compact_ (in $X$) if every open cover of $K$ contains a finite subcover.

So, $K$ is not compact means there exists an open cover of $K$ with no finite subcover.

For example,

(@) $\left[\frac{1}{2}, 1\right)$ is not compact (see $\{V_n\}$).
(@) $\mathbb{Z}$ in $\mathbb{R}$ is not compact. One witness cover is $\{U_i\}_{i \in \mathbb{Z}}$, where $U_i = \left(i - \frac{1}{10}, i + \frac{1}{10}\right)$.

__Theorem.__ Finite sets are compact.

_Proof._ Consider some open cover $\{G_\alpha\}$ covering $x_1, x_2, \dots, x_n$. For all $x_i$, choose $G_{\alpha_i}$. Then $\{G_{\alpha_i}\}_{i = 1}^n$ covers the set. QED.

A set $K$ is _bounded_ if there is some ball $N_r(x)$ for some $x \in X$ such that $K \subset N_r(x)$.

__Theorem.__ Compact sets are bounded.

_Proof._ Consider a compact set $K$. Let $B(x) = N_1(x)$, i.e. $B(x)$ are balls of radius $1$. Consider a collection $\{B(x)\}_{x \in K}$, which is an open cover of $K$. By compactness of $K$, there exists a finite subcover $\{B(x_i)\}_{i = 1}^n$. Let $R = max_{1 \leq i \leq n}\{d(x_1, x_i)\}$; this maximum exists because the set $\{x_1, \dots, x_n\}$ is finite. Then $N_{R + 2}(x_1)$ contains all of $K$. QED.

## Relative Open Sets

If $Y \subset X$, where $X$ is a metric space, $Y$ is said to _inherit_ a metric from $X$.

A set $U$ is _open_ in $Y$ (or _open relative_ to $Y$) if every point of $U$ is an interior point of $U$. Here, the notion of interior is using the neighborhoods in $Y$.

__Theorem.__ Suppose $E \subset Y \subset X$. Then $E$ is open in $Y$ if and only if $E = Y \cap G$ for some $G$ open in $X$.

## Compactness is Intrinsic

__Theorem.__ Suppose $K \subset Y \subset X$, where $X$ is a metric space. Then $K$ is compact in $Y$ if and only if $K$ is compact in $X$.

 _Proof._

 ($\Rightarrow$): Assume $K$ is compact in $Y$. Consider any open cover $\{U_\alpha\}$ of $K$ in $X$. Let $V_\alpha = U_\alpha \cap Y$. Then $\{V_\alpha\}$ covers $K$ in $Y$. Since $K$ is compact in $Y$, there exists a finite subcover $\{V_{\alpha_1}, \dots, V_{\alpha_n}\}$ in $Y$. Then $\{U_{\alpha_1}, \dots, U_{\alpha_n}\}$ is a finite subcover of $K$ in $X$, as desired.

 ($\Leftarrow$): Assume $K$ is compact in $X$. Consider any open cover $\{V_\alpha\}$ of $K$ in $Y$. By above theorem, there exists open $U_\alpha$ such that $V_\alpha = U_\alpha \cap Y$. Then $\{U_\alpha\}$ covers $K$ in $X$. Since $K$ is compact in $X$, there exists a finite subcover $\{U_{\alpha_1}, \dots, U_{\alpha_n}\}$. Then $\{V_{\alpha_1}, \dots, V_{\alpha_n}\}$ is a finite subcover of $K$ in $Y$, as desired. QED.

## Relationship between Compact Sets and Closed Sets

__Theorem.__ Compact sets are closed.

_Proof._ Let $K$ be compact. Consider $p \notin K$. We'll show $p$ has a neighborhood that does not intersect $K$ (or $p$ is not a limit point of $K$). For any $q \in K$, let $V_q = N_\frac{r}{2}(q)$ and $U_q = N_\frac{r}{2}(p)$, where $r = d(p, q)$. Notice $\{V_q\}$ is an open cover of $K$. By compactness of $K$, there exists a finite subcover $\{V_{q_1}, \dots, V_{q_n}\}$. Let $W = \bigcap_{i = 1}^n U_{q_i}$. So $W$ is an intersection of finitely many open sets. Hence, $W$ is open (it is a ball of radius $\min \left\{\frac{d(p, q_i)}{2}\right\}$). We have $W \cap V_{q_i} = \emptyset$ for all $q_i$ because $W \subset V_{q_i}$ and $V_{q_i} \cap U_{q_i} = \emptyset$. So $W$ is the desired neighborhood. QED.

For example,

(@) $(0, 1)$ in $\mathbb{R}$ is not compact because it's not closed.
(@) $\mathbb{R}$ in $\mathbb{R}$ is not compact although it's closed because it's not bounded.

__Theorem.__ A closed subset $B$ of a compact set $K$ is compact.

_Proof._ Consider any open cover $\{U_\alpha\}$ of $B$. Since $B$ is closed, $B^c$ is open. So $B^c \cup \{U_\alpha\}$ is an open cover of $K$. Since $K$ is compact, there exists a finite subcover $\{U_{\alpha_1}, \dots, U_{\alpha_n}, B^c\}$ of $K$. Since $B^c \cap B = \emptyset$, $\{U_{\alpha_1}, \dots, U_{\alpha_n}\}$ covers $B$ and it is a finite subcover of the original cover. QED.

__Corollary.__ Suppose set $B$ is closed and set $K$ is compact. Then $B \cap K$ is compact.

Consider intervals $I_n = [a_n, b_n]$. They are _nested_ means if $m > n$ then $a_n \leq a_m \leq b_m \leq b_n$.

__Theorem.__ Nested closed intervals in $\mathbb{R}$ are not empty (in $\mathbb{R}^k$, nested closed $k$-cells are not empty).

 _Proof._ Let $x = \sup\{a_i\}$. It exists because $a_i$'s are bounded by $b_1$. Since $x$ is a supremum, $x \geq a_i$ for all $i$. We have $x \leq b_i$ for all $i$ since $b_i$ is an upper bound of all $a_i$'s (due to nestedness). QED.

 Aside: _Proof that $\mathbb{R}$ is uncountable._ Suppose $\mathbb{R}$ is countable, i.e. $\mathbb{R} = \{x_1, x_2, x_3, \dots\}$. Choose closed intervals $I_1$ that misses $x_1$, $I_2 \subset I_1$ that misses $x_1$ and $x_2$, $I_3 \subset I_2$ that misses $x_1$, $x_2$, and $x_3$, and so on. So, $I_n$ is a nested closed interval. By previous theorem, there exists a point in $\bigcap I_n$ that is not one of the $x_i$'s and is thus not on the original listing. QED.

__Theorem.__ Any closed interval $[a, b]$ is compact (in $\mathbb{$}$). This is also true for $k$-cells in $\mathbb{R}^k$.

_Proof (by contradiction)._ Suppose there is a closed interval $[a, b]$ that is not compact. Then there exists an open cover $\{U_\alpha\}$ for $[a, b]$ which has no finite subcover. Then $\{U_\alpha\}$ covers both $[a, c_1]$ and $[c_1, b]$, at least one of which has no finite subcover of $\{U_\alpha\}$. Without loss of generality, assume $I_1 = [a, c_1]$ has no finite subcover. Subdivide $I_1$ again using $c_2$ which is the half way point of $a$ and $c_1$. Note that at least one of $[a, c_2]$ and $[c_2, c_1]$ has no finite subcover. Continue and we'll obtain $I_1 \supset I_2 \supset I_3 \supset \dots$ of nested closed intervals, each halves at each step and has no finite subcover of $\{U_\alpha\}$. By the nested interval theorem, there exists $x \in I_n$ for all $n$. Then $x$ is in some $U_\widehat{\alpha}$ of the cover $\{U_\alpha\}$. Since $U_\widehat{\alpha}$ is open, there exists an $r > 0$ such that $N_r(x) \subset U_\widehat{\alpha}$. Since the intervals halve at each step, some $I_n$ is contained in $N_r(x)$. This means that $G_\widehat{\alpha}$ covers $I_n$, which contradicts the fact that it has no finite subcover. QED.

## The Heine-Borel Theorem

__Theorem.__ In $\mathbb{R}$ (or in $\mathbb{R}^n$), $K$ is compact if and only if $K$ is both closed and bounded.

_Proof._

($\Rightarrow$): already done.

($\Leftarrow$): (it is not true in arbitrary metric spaces) Since $K$ is bounded, $K \subset [-r, r]$ for some $r > 0$. Since $K$ is closed (by assumption) and $[-r, r]$ is compact (by the previous theorem), $K$ is also compact. QED.

For $\mathbb{R}^n$, replace closed interval by $n$-cell.

For example,

(@) Discrete metric on infinite set $A$: $A$ is closed and bounded but is not compact.
(@) Let $\mathcal{C}_b(\mathbb{R})$ is the set of all bounded continuous functions $f : \mathbb{R} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$. Let $d(f, g) = \sup_{x \in \mathbb{R}}|f(x) - g(x)|$.

## Properties about Compactness

__Theorem.__ $K$ is compact if and only if every infinite subset $E$ of $K$ has a limit point in $K$.

_Proof._

($\Rightarrow$): If no point in $K$ is a limit point of $E$ then each point $q \in E$ has a neighborhood $V_q$ containing no other point of $E$ other than $q$. $\{V_q\}$ covers $E$ with no finite subcover, implying $K$ is not compact, which is a contradiction.

($\Leftarrow$) proof for $\mathbb{R}^n$ but is true for all metric spaces: Need to show $K$ is closed and bounded. Suppose $K$ is not bounded. Choose $x_n$ such that $|x_n| > n$. These have no limit point, which is a contradiction. So $K$ is bounded. Suppose $K$ is not closed. There exists a point $p \notin K$ that is a limit point of $E$. Choose $x_n$ such that $d(x_n, z) < \frac{1}{n}$. $x_n$ has a limit point at $p$ and no other. QED.

__Corollary (Bolzano-Weierstrass Theorem).__ Every bounded infinite subset of $\mathbb{R}^n$ has a limit point in $\mathbb{R}^n$.

_Proof._ If subset $E$ is bounded then $E$ is in some compact $k$-cell. So $E$ has a limit point in the $k$-cell. QED.

__Theorem (Finite intersection property, due to Cantor).__ Let $\{K_\alpha\}$ be compact subsets of some metric space $X$. If any finite subsollection has non-empty intersection then the intersection of all $K_\alpha$ is non-empty.

_Proof (by contradiction)._ Let $U_\alpha = K_\alpha^c$, which is open. Choose an arbitrary $K$ from $\{K_\alpha\}$. If $\bigcap\limits_\alpha K_\alpha = \emptyset$, then $\{U_\alpha\}$ covers $K$. Since $K$ is compact, there exists a finite subcover $\{U_{\alpha_1}, \dots U_{\alpha_n}\}$ covering $K$. So, $K \cap K_{\alpha_1} \cap \dots \cap K_{\alpha_n} = \emptyset$, which constradicts the hypothesis. QED.
