---
title: Compiler Theory
subtitle: Type Safety Proof
---

# Prerequisites
A type safety proof for our languages requires

- principle of implication
  - If P implies Q and P then Q
- principle of induction
  - Let J be some inductively defined judgment, defined by R₁, R₂, ..., Rₙ.
  - To prove some property for J, i.e. P(J), it suffices to prove
    1) If P(sub-derivations of R₀) then P(R₀)
    2) If P(sub-derivations of R₁) then P(R₁)
    3) and so on, up to Rₙ.

# Examples
We first have to define some equivalence relation `a` ≡ `b**, in order to talk about some results of `eval being equivalent.

## [v ≡ᵥ v]{.boxed} Value equivalence
```
————————
 n ≡ᵥ n
```
```
————————
 b ≡ᵥ b
```
```
 v₁ ≡ᵥ v₁'     v₂ ≡ᵥ v₂'
—————————————————————————
 (v₁, v₂) ≡ᵥ (v₁', v₂')
```

## [a ≡ b]{.boxed} Equivalence
```
 a ≡ᵥ b
————————
 a ≡ b
```
```
 a ≡ b     b ≡ c
—————————————————
      a ≡ c
```

## Theorems

**Theorem:** for all `n`, `m` : `Nat`, `eval(n + add1 m)` ≡ `eval(add1 n + m)`.

*Proof (by induction on `n`):*

Case `0`: `eval(0 + add1 m)` ≡ `eval(add1 0 + m)`

- Since `0 + add1 m` → `add1 m` and `add1 0 + m` → `0 + add1 m` → `add1 m`, `eval(0 + add1 m)` ≡ `eval(add1 0 + m)`, as desired.

Case `add1 n'`: `eval(add1 n' + add1 m)` ≡ `eval(add1 (add1 n') + m)`.

- Since `add1 n' + add1 m` → `n' + add1 (add1 m)` and `add1 (add1 n') + m` → `add1 n' + add1 m` → `n' + add1 (add1 m)`, `eval(add1 n' + add1 m)` ≡ `eval(add1 (add1 n') + m)`, as desired.

QED.

**Theorem:** for all `n`, `m` : `Nat`, `eval(add1 n + m)` ≡ `eval(add1 (n + m))`.

*Proof (by induction on `n`):*

Case `0`: `eval(add1 0 + m)` ≡ `eval(add1 (0 + m))`

- Since `add1 0 + m` → `0 + add1 m` → `add1 m` and `add1 (0 + m)` → `add1 m`, `eval(add1 0 + m)` ≡ `eval(add1 (0 + m))`, as desired.

Case `add1 n'`: `eval(add1 (add1 n') + m)` ≡ `eval(add1 (add1 n' + m))`

- Our induction hypothesis is `eval(add1 n' + m)` ≡ `eval(add1 (n' + m))`

- Since `add1 (add1 n') + m` → `add1 n' + add1 m` and `eval(add1 n' + add1 m)` ≡ `eval(add1 (n' + add1 m))` (by our induction hypothesis), `eval(add1 (add1 n') + m)` ≡ `eval(add1 (n' + add1 m))`.

- Also, since `add1 (add1 n' + m)` → `add1 (n' + add1 m)`, `eval(add1 (add1 n' + m))` ≡ `eval(add1 (n' + add1 m))`.

- Thus, `eval(add1 (add1 n') + m)` ≡ `eval(add1 (add1 n' + m))`, as desired.

QED.

**Theorem:** for all `n` : `Nat`, `eval(n + 0)` ≡ `eval(n)`.

*Proof (by induction on `n`):*

Case `0`: `eval(0 + 0)` ≡ `eval(0)`

- Since `0 + 0` → `0`, `eval(0 + 0)` ≡ `eval(0)`, as desired.

Case `add1 m`: `eval(add1 m + 0)` ≡ `eval(add1 m)`

- Our induction hypothesis is `eval(m + 0)` ≡ `eval(m)`.

- Since `eval(add1 m + 0)` ≡ `eval(add1 (m + 0))` and `eval(m + 0)` ≡ `eval(m)` (by our induction hypothesis), `eval(add1 m + 0)` ≡ `eval(add1 m)`, as desired.

QED.

**Theorem:** for all `n`, `m` : `Nat`, `eval(n + m)` ≡ `eval(m + n)`.

*Proof (by induction on n):*

Case `0`: `eval(0 + m)` ≡ `eval(m + 0)`

- Since `0 + m` → `m`, `eval(0 + m)` ≡ `eval(m)`.

- Since `eval(m + 0)` ≡ `eval(m)`, `eval(m + 0)` ≡ `eval(0 + m)`, as desired.

Case `add1 n'`: `eval(add1 n' + m)` ≡ `eval(m + add1 n')`

- Our induction hypothesis is `eval(n' + m)` ≡ `eval(m + n')`. Hence, `eval(add1 (n' + m))` ≡ `eval(add1 (m + n'))`.

- Since `eval(add1 n' + m)` ≡ `eval(add1 (n' + m))`, `eval(m + add1 n')` ≡ `eval(add1 m + n')`, `eval(add1 m + n')` ≡ `eval(add1 (m + n'))`, and `eval(add1 (n' + m))` ≡ `eval(add1 (m + n'))`, we have `eval(add1 n' + m)` ≡ `eval(m + add1 n')`, as desired.

QED.

# Type safety proof
*Proof (by induction on • ⊢ e : A):*

Case `Nat`: if • ⊢ `n` : `Nat`, then `eval(n)` = `n`.

- By definition of `eval`:
  ```
     ————————
      n →* n
  —————————————
   eval(n) = n
  ```
  as desired.

Case `Bool`: elided for brevity

Case `If`: If • ⊢ e : `Bool` implies `eval(`e`)` = `v`, • ⊢ e₁ : A implies `eval(`e₁`)` = v₁, • ⊢ e₂ : A implies `eval(`e₂`)` = v₂, then • ⊢ `if` e `then` e₁ `else` e2 implies `eval(if` e `then` e₁ `else` e₂`)` = v₃.

- This requires proof of canonical form.
  - If Γ ⊢ `v` : `Bool`, then `v` = `true` or `v` = `false`.

Case `λ`: If `x` : A ⊢ e : B implies then • ⊢ `λx:`A`.`e : A → B implies `eval(λx:`A`.`e`)` = v.

- We are stuck in this case.

## A way out
In order to prove type safety, we need to strengthen the theorem: we have to prove progress and preservation instead. In addition, for convenience, we define irreducibles and call values observables.

i `::=` `x` | v | `λx:`A.`e

**Lemma (progress):** if • ⊢ e : A then either e is irreducible or e → e'.

**Lemma (preservation):** if Γ ⊢ e : A and e → e' then Γ ⊢ e' : A.

Furthermore, we define valid top level programs [⊢ e]{.boxed} in order to rule out evaluating λs at the top level.

### [⊢ e]{.boxed} Valid top level programs
```
 • ⊢ e : Nat
—————————————
     ⊢ e
```
```
 • ⊢ e : Bool
——————————————
      ⊢ e
```

## Type safety, redefined
**Theorem (type safety):** if ⊢ e then `eval(`e`)` = v or `eval(`e`)** = Ω.

*Proof:* By progress, since • ⊢ e : A, either e is irreducible or e → e'.

Case e is irreducible: by canonical form, `eval(`e`)` = v, either e = n or e = b.

Case e → e': we must show that either e' is a value or by progress, e' can continue computing, i.e. `eval(`e`)` = Ω.

# Proof of progress
In order to prove progress, we have to change our model to include congruence closure.

We also change syntax for reduction relation to [e ⊳ e]{.boxed}.

The older syntax [e → e]{.boxed} is now reserved for congruence closure has all congruence rules (hence the name).

Conversion rules [e →* e]{.boxed} now only contain reflexivity and transitivity rules.

Also, congruence closure has a new rule.
```
 e ⊳ e'
————————
 e → e'
```

*Proof (for progress):*

Case `Var`: impossible

Case `Add`:
```
 • ⊢ e₁ : Nat     • ⊢ e₂ : Nat
———————————————————————————————
      • ⊢ e₁ + e₂ : Nat
```
- By the induction hypothesis, e₁ is either irreducible or e₁ → e₁'
- Case e₁ → e₁': we have e₁ + e₂ → e₁' + e₂, as desired.
- Case e₁ is irreducible:
  - Case e₂ → e₂': By Congruence-Add1 rule, i + e₂ → i + e₂'.
  - Case e₂ is irreducible: by canonical form, i₁ + i₂ must step to their sum.

And so on.

# Note
Progress and preservation is a particular proof technique to prove type safety.
