---
title: Maths and Programs
tags: existential-quantifiers, functional-programming, universal-quantifiers
date: 2012-10-01
---
Let's solve this question (taken from the second assignment of [Functional Programming in Scala](https://www.coursera.org/course/progfun)):

> Using `forall`, implement a function `exists` which tests whether a set contains at least one element for which the given predicate is true. Note that the functions `forall` and `exists` behave like the universal and existential quantifiers of first-order logic.

The code listing for `forall` is as follows:

```scala
def forall(s: Set, p: Int => Boolean): Boolean = {
  def iter(a: Int): Boolean = {
    if (a > bound) true
    else if (contains(s, a) && !p(a)) false
    else iter(a + 1)
  }
  iter(-bound)
}
```

where `bound` is `1000`.

A set is a defined as follows, along with the predicate to test for containment.

```scala
type Set = Int => Boolean
def contains(s: Set, x: Int) = s(x)
```

Here is how I arrive at the answer for the question:

> 1. From the question, it is intuitive to try to stop the iteration when there is an element that satisfies the predicate `p`, which is exactly what `exists` should do.
> 2. The iteration is stopped only when the current element `a` does not satisfy `p`.
> 3. However, we need to satisfy `p` in order for `exists` to correctly do its job.

> In conclusion, we need a double negation here. In other words, we need to negate `p` and then negate the answer returned by `forall` when called with the negation of `p`.

From that reasoning, it is easy to code up the first attempt at a solution.

```scala
def exists(s: Set, p: Int => Boolean): Boolean = !forall(s, x => !p(x))
```

Now, let's see how this solution fares.

```scala
scala> def natural = (x: Int) => x > 0
scala> forall(natural, x % 2 == 0) // should return false, as not all naturals are even
Res01 = false
scala> exists(natural, x % 2 == 0) // should return true
Res02 = true
```

The solution passes the tests. Let's look at how to explain the code simply. The code says

> There exists in set `s` an element that satisfies the predicate `p` when not all of the elements in `s` satisfies the negation of `p`.

That makes sense. But lo and behold, the code reflects a mathematical truth, and it even looks like it is translated verbatim from mathematical symbols to programmatical symbols!

&exist;x:P(x) &equiv; &not;&forall;x:&not;P(x)

compared with

```scala
def exists(s: Set, p: Int => Boolean): Boolean = !forall(s, x => !p(x))
```

The correspondence is remarkable!

After reading this post, you should try this question. The answer will pleasantly surprise you.

> Finally, write a function `map` which transforms a given set into another one by applying to each of its element the given function. `map` has the following signature:

```scala
def map(s: Set, f: Int => Int): Set
```
